I am watching deals happen where the
absolute bare minimum number of
shareholders approved the deal and when
we grew up when I grew up I was taught
back in the day listen no matter what
the documents say no matter what the
certificate says almost every acquire
wants close to 100% approval to avoid
liabilities and headaches I've seen two
deals recently and I had a material
ownership I wasn't even asked for a
consent and I watched another one where
the founders made a lot and the
investors didn't that happens this isn't
a criticism right but it was interesting
because it was a big acquire they needed
80.1% approval and that's all they got
and it took a month it wasn't even a it
took forever my point is they took the
risk in these deals right is that more
common can I get away with the absolute
bare minimum today yeah I think so the
unfortunate aspect of how the world has
changed in terms of the scope of who is
investing and how many investors are
participating as the the private Market
has evolved over the last 20 years in
this class of of prosumer investors has
emerged Beyond back in the day you just
didn't have the crazy cap tables that
you have nowadays to deal with hello
everyone it's uh wonderful to be here I
am Steve mitsen mocker and today I'm
excited to share with you the 10 things
no one ever tells you about getting
acquired for $1 or 1.5 billion uh
dollars over the years I've LED
corporate development for multiple
public technology companies sitting on
both sides of the m& table um primarily
as an acquir but more recently as the
acquir a uh throughout these experiences
I've learned some really hard-hitting
lessons insights that you will typically
find in the m&a Playbook and so today
I'm going to share the realities of
getting acquired the things that can
make or break your deal the hidden
challenges no one talks about and how to
sell yourself up for Success so let's
take a moment to talk about the odds of
actually closing a deal the reality is
exits are very rare there's a bunch of
coverage about this last week blueberg
ran an article about the 1200 zombie
corns which is a new addition to the
corn suffix uh a little less uh
glamorous use of it in the 2021 class of
350 unicorns they bullied in 15 total
accents realized even worse there's
1,200 total unicorns still waiting for
an exit along with that is some data
that was published by CA Jason I think
you had highlighted this on some of your
recent coverage the vast majority of
startups will never see an acquisition
offer and even among those that do many
of those deals will fall apart before
the Finish Line why is that because m&a
isn't just about having a great company
it's about being at the right place at
the right time and then being able to
successfully navigate an incredibly
complex process where the buyer's
motivations internal Dynamics and
constraints matter just as much as is
you and your company and what you've
built so many Founders and Executives
assume that once an offer is on the
table it's just a matter of finishing
some paperwork but the truth is deals
collapse all the time on the inside due
to misalignments on valuation surprises
and diligence or just the shifting
priorities that can happen within the
acquiring company that's why it's
crucial to really understand how the
buyers think what drives their decision
and how to proactively manage the
process you often only get one shot in
an acquisition so you can't afford to be
unprepared or assume that things will
just work
out hey Steve before we get into it I'll
probably have to refrain from peppering
you with too many questions but one
interest because you've been on both
sides of it you have been on the buyer
side for folks corporate development
these guys are in charge of a bunch of
things but it's really buying startups
which we can talk about but you've done
it at public companies and now you've
been a Target right you've been on the
other side at bought for almost two
billion which is fun on the odds
question here's the weird thing I've
been acquired twice as a Founder but
when I was at Adobe on the other side
okay the surprising thing to me was the
list and what I mean is yes the odds
statistically are very low right but
they're actually both worse and better
than it looks in this experience and
what I mean was when I was there there
were three business units and everyone
had an m&a list okay and there were like
big ones the Billion Dollar Plus deals
and tuck-ins okay and the V the svps the
EVPs made their list and I'll tell you
the thing was they were weird like I
knew the document space really well and
I was like what about Dropbox guys those
guys seem to be doing well but they had
a very strong opinion in the space of a
list the list could be argued and
debated but what I mean is if you're on
the list your odds are higher if you're
off the list even if you're the best
idea in the world for Salesforce or
whomever you may not ever even have a
conversation if you make more sense than
someone on the list that's a totally
weird thing about the odds is that
consistent with your experience that
there's folks on and off the list when
the list could be almost infinitely long
yeah no I think that's absolutely right
we you do the best that you can with the
the the visibility that you have but
I've been in organizations where I was a
Corp Dev team of one or maybe I was
lucky and I was a Corp Dev team of four
or five for these organizations but it's
all about that how much visibility you
have how much you can really do those
sweeps and then once you do yeah you
have these individuals that have these
formed points of view right or wrong to
manage around and so you on the outside
it's like the unfortunate thing that
happens when you're trying to get hired
right like you might think you're the
best candidate in the world but some
company might not ever find you or if
they did find you there's a whole bunch
of other candidates out there that they
might just determine or candidates right
so and I remember when I bought when I
brought up Dropbox as an idea it was too
late it was too big right they wanted to
buy a drawbox competitor an adjacent
player right and interestingly why do
they want to buy them one reason was the
co had been a VP there and it wasn't
just the obvious reasons it was trust it
was familiarity we knew him and maybe
that's a safer play bringing someone
back into the fold than some random
thing we don't understand relationship
you'll get into it but relation the way
they work it's really quirky though it's
really but they're so important in m&a
they're so important just for nothing
else to drisk things yeah we'll talk
about that more but it is it is not just
a technology play or a product play
there are so many other factors that can
go in whether it's the finance side the
people side you're right it's a
multi-prong beast all right keep going I
just wanted to share this list thing
people don't get I didn't get as a
Founder that there're these lists right
and in some ways if you really want to
get acquired if you're not on the list
it's harder if you've never been through
an m&a process it's easy to assume that
everything is r and structured and
driven by pure business logic but the
truth is as Jason suggested it's it can
be very messy political and filled with
unspoken agendas first it's important to
understand that inside the acquiring
company there's many different
stakeholders m&a decisions aren't always
about the acquiring company needing your
business you might be a defensive play
to keep you out of competitor hands
other times they're making a bet on very
long-term potential rather than
immediate value so really understanding
the hidden drivers behind the rationale
for your deal can be incredibly powerful
information to have for you to navigate
the negotiations more effectively at
each stage of the process an m&a the
game behind the game often matters more
as much as the deal itself and that's
what we call it the inside baseball for
how the buyer is driving the transaction
we're going to talk now in terms of the
lessons but let's start with that pre-i
phase the time before you've ever
received the letter inent and might not
even know you are on the list and this
stage is critical because it could set
the foundation for everything that
follows so number one be prepared
Acquisitions don't happen overnight
companies that get acquired success get
acquired successfully aren't scrambling
to clean up their financials when the
offer
arrive next up is this concept uh of
lines not dots one of the biggest Miss
in m&a is that the m&a buyer will
suddenly appear out of nowhere uh
knocking on your door and in reality my
job was to track companies for years I
have my own proprietary little instance
of Salesforce that we managed just like
you would like a Pros pipeline we
tracked thousands of companies over many
years in terms of understanding their
progress their traction how the
leadership team has evolved and we'll
really want to understand that before we
ever make a move as a Corp dead buyer so
it's why the relationships matter I I
say you never want the first time you
talk to a potential acquirer when you're
ready to sell yeah there's always I say
always take one call a
week if for SE like it you just and you
always learn something right from
corporate development I think you always
learn something no matter what I'm not
saying you have to take the junior
Analyst at the PE firm call but if
someone from Corp Dev from Salesforce or
Informatica wants to talk to even if
they're one year out of school take the
call just end it at 30 minutes and don't
do any follow up you don't have to do
any followup you don't have to send them
any data you don't have to do anything
you can just be kind and just say Steve
I love the call I'm sorry I'm too
overloaded to send that followup or do
another call but let's talk down the
road just be nice you'll learn something
and you can always my learning is when
you get that person on the call you can
always at if you share 20 minutes or 15
minutes you can have an Ask back so
Steve how is it be thinking about the
space how what do you what have you
learned what is Informatica thinking
what is own thinking you're always going
to get a nugget if you just ask the
Columbo question you don't have to be
you just what how you thinking about the
space you may just hear the thing build
by or partner then they want to do
something fast you may hear honestly my
B we're just getting to know the space
right and that's there's like a lot of
Truth in that right you'll get even at
bare minimum you'll learn that's your
job is to know these things
right yeah that's great and so the last
one isn't very clearly question mark
frust the process with a question mark
m&a is messy yes there is a process but
it's never as straightforward as it
looks on my on my little Chevron chart
so there'll be unexpected delays
shifting priorities and moments where
you feel like it's slipping away and the
truth is while Corp Dev will have that
structured Playbook you need to
understand that process just as well you
need to know when to push you need to
know when to hold firm and when to walk
away if the deal or the timeline isn't
meeting your needs your AV ability to
navigate and help manage and control the
uncertainty and stay disciplined through
the ups and downs of the process can
determine whether the deal gets done on
the right terms or will fall apart
entirely so that's before the LOI now
let's move on to that exciting time of
you've received an Loi and you're in the
thick of it this period while you're you
first received the offer going through
the detail due diligence and ully
negotiating the definitive agreement is
where deals can really gain momentum or
potentially fall
apart so first up it's a two-way street
so while it's easy to feel like the
acquirer holds all the power in an MMA
deal that's not really the case right my
job as a Corp Dev leader is to land this
thing and I have to make sure you're a
willing participant in that process so
the buyer is just as dependent as you
are on them and due diligence is a
two-way process yes you are being
evaluated but you should also be
evaluating them what's their track
record with Acquisitions how do they
handle integration what's their culture
really like and especially if there's a
significant amount of the deal
consideration that involves stock you're
not just selling your company you're
trading it for a piece of theirs and but
the investment of your future time will
actually turn into so understanding what
you're getting into beyond the
financials is really critical during
this
stage next up manage expectation so
deals always take longer than expected
your team as it grows uh of Who's
involved in the process will have lots
of questions externally the acquirer
will raise our concerns surprises will
come up so the most important thing
about keeping a deal on track is being
clear consistent honest in
Communications over promising uh
creating false expectations just kills
trust and can absolutely kill a deal so
being transparent about risks interg
integration challenges realistic
projections that you're signing up to we
don't expect Perfection as the acquire
but we really value and um expect
honesty so if there's one thing that can
kill a deal it's a big surprise in
diligence and so the more proactively
you manage expectations communicate
clearly and honestly the smoother your
deal will
go and the last one is Leverage The Last
Mile so I think again back to that point
earlier about two-way street the closer
you get to the final parts of the
agreement you actually have massive
leverage if you know how to use it in
those final stages and being very
strategic about how you negotiate some
of the critical terms in a deal
retention bonuses for employees in a
great commitments or deal structure
optimizations being very strategic about
finding the timing to do that and
working with your advisers and the rest
to do that let me ask you a question on
this Steve based on all your experience
and I can share some of mine after but
it's less than yours how much can you
push back on price and how many times
how many rounds can you push back on
price so what I would say
is headline price at those final St
stages like none none at the fin stage
yeah none at the final stage about prei
what about pre-i get an offer so prei
look there's
realistically a lot of room that have to
give it all away and it depending on
what kind of deal it is and the rest but
what I can guarantee you is the first
offer that you get in that first draft
of the LOI that you get is never the top
end of the number never that I've never
you know gone out to to my approval
committee for that hunting license to go
explore a deal now whether it's a 30%
premium to that a 50% premium 100%
premium to that there are a lot of
factors that will determine my strategy
around what my first offer is versus
what my walkway number will end up being
but yeah you can pretty much guarantee
that first number is never what anybody
really expects as the final now again
there going to be a lot of parts that
move back and forth depending on how
much up front how much is held back how
much is Cash how much is stock right
there's a lot of different reever that
could swing how much room there is yeah
but like any good negotiator right
there's not an infinite number of turns
and there's probably not more than
somewhere between three and five
depending on more than I would have
guess three and five uh yeah for sure on
in price yeah again typically it's I'll
put it out an offer they'll give a
counter I'll give a counter back that's
what I'm counting as three and then the
question yeah the second counter you're
not going to usually get to a third back
and forth counter if you're that far
apart again something probably pretty
meaningful and the question of after
that second counter I'm calling
contestant number two and getting a feel
for what will we have to trade off to go
to our number two target versus the
price I I think I can get them for yeah
I thought Founders just especially
first-time Founders that Dynamic it's
something they don't read properly Steve
calls you up you have a conversation
they offers you 100 million for your
startup you a lot there's certain lellan
Founders that it's all a game right and
more power to them I I wish but a lot of
folks take it very literally I find
they're like Steve said 100 uh I'm not
I'm out I literally had this
conversation a couple weeks ago with
some Founders who were just out from an
offer and I'm like I don't know man
you're pretty good companies we we don't
with the I get couple takeaways one I
know you wouldn't use these terms but
for corporate development their job's a
weird one on the one hand they they're
playing a bit of a price game it's part
of their job it's part of their job to
be a buffer from the operating executive
sometimes so the shio or the Ed it's not
a part it is basically the be the buffer
be the buffer so that be the realize
keep them clean that's how use that line
all the time I'm here to keep you clean
realize that CLE clean yeah but on the
other hand Corp DS weird so they'll feel
like they're beating you up on price but
then if the deal doesn't close they
don't they get an L it's a weird so
they're both they feel when you're
talking with these Executives in the
beginning it's really nice the first
discovery call I find and then when you
get close it can feel frustrating
because you feel beat down on price and
I I'll share a couple stories I don't
know the answers but just realize they
also want to get the deal done at the
same time so just listen and be nice
related question okay so you said five
go around Max but really that means I
think Founders roughly speaking can
negotiate price twice right that's the
maximum they can that's my experience if
it's truly a lowball because it's a game
I say almost ignore it be nice but say
listen 100 but Steve we're at 80 million
growing 100% I'm not
like I appreciate you but that well let
me start by saying I really screwed up
if I Dro that 100 in front of you and I
haven't done some bit of like
socialization so I know before I Dro
that thing in front of you I got to know
I'm like within spitting distance I'm in
a ballpark that we're not wasting time
me and my team like we've done of that
work to hopefully have a degree of
freedom of Landing Zone where we think
will be appropriate that that will be
part of the exercise and that's usually
good signaling for you to start getting
serious and getting ready when you start
getting some of those questions now
hopefully my like I hav't done it so
obviously that I've again through those
multiple meetings over a period of time
teased it out of you so that to some
extent by the time we've called and said
we're ready to deliver this to you it is
still a bit of a surprise it's not been
totally because again if if I've given
you too much time that way you've gone
out and shopped it to my three other
competitors and sometimes given you too
much time so not all founders are
shoppers but sometimes they are right
let me ask you two follow-up questions
the last round as an anchor I watched an
investment go through a very interesting
m&a process recently which is company's
cash flow positive when you're there how
do you if a company's doing well and
then if it's not doing well how do you
think of the last round price as an
anchor for
valuation there's a lot of variable that
will play into that in terms of like
where the market is where that company
is where you are but yeah I'll be very
honest usually it's a pretty big anchor
we know that unless there are material
extenuating circumstance The Entity is
HBL and kneecapped in some way that all
that money that's in that player
assuming it's smart money that they're
not going to do anything dumb and if
they see that performance of that
business and they paid with they paid at
that time now again we've had some we
have had some of those weird discont
continuities right when you go from a
world where everybody's willing to you
know fund things at 30 times and then
you have this massive correction that
takes it down to eight times like
there's a lot of discontinuity through
the system that has to still work its
way through to adjust to that and that
might be the example right these
sophisticated buyers might just be
feeling like hey that discontinuity if
they haven't internalized it that's just
the new reality and too bad that you
raised all that money at that grossly
inflated price 10% is better is like
what current market is the best you can
do and those kind of things happen but
again you would have thought that they
would have at least communicated that
message in a way that that that didn't
leave it so shocking for how you were
trying to grock where that where that
big mismatch on value was being placed
the good reminder is that even today if
a company is doing well the last round
is a floor it's an an
and you have to be corporate Dev wants
the deal to close and and you can offer
anything you want but it is a real it's
a real point right if you're doing well
the last round isn't an insane price
it's gone to if the investors don't make
a profit it's tough to get them on board
right if there's no reason to to do the
deal right let me ask you two other qu
questions on this something that's
changed for me in m&a that I've watched
and granted this is with companies that
aren't absolute s tier right but I am
watching deals happen where the ABS
abute bare minimum number of
shareholders approved the deal and when
we grew up when I grew up I was taught
back in the day listen no matter what
the documents say no matter what the
certificate says no matter what the
almost every acquir wants close to 100%
approval to avoid liabilities and
headaches I've seen two deals recently
that were overall and I had a material
ownership I wasn't even asked for a
consent and I watched another one where
the founders made a lot and the
investors didn't that happens this isn't
a criticism right but it was interesting
because it was a big acquir they needed
80.1% approval and that's all they got
and it took a month it wasn't even a it
took forever my point is they took the
risk in these deals right is that more
common can I get away with the absolute
bare minimum today yeah I think so the
unfortunate aspect of how the world has
changed in terms of the scope of who is
investing and how many investors are
participating as the the private Market
has evolved over the last 20 years in
this class of prosumer investors has
emerged Beyond back in the day you just
didn't have the crazy cap tables that
you have nowadays to deal with okay one
last one I could ask you 50 then I'll
let you finish and then I might ask you
more but on the two-way street and the
rounds of
negotiation how big a deal is it walking
away from that second offer obviously
it's an issue right it's an issue but in
terms of process if the offer just isn't
good enough right is it and you walk
away kindly does that kill the deal does
it not kill the deal not what you're
learning on all of this stuff from
walking away kindly it's a very strong
it depends but again you have to know
that like back your point before about
my job is to get the deals done yeah I
don't ever go in without some form of
contingencies so again the risk you run
and you've I like I could like quote
things that you've written about this is
Once you walk just remember you might
never get a second call from me or
anybody else and then you're back to the
2% odd games yeah that's the internal
risk that you know you as the founder
take that's a good summary thank you
yeah all right okay we're now in the
home stretch definitive AG agreement to
close but remember just because you've
signed the definitive agreement doesn't
mean that it's over and the time between
da and closing can be just as TW tricky
as the prior stages so first deals are
one at the Press release this is one of
my favorite little quotes signing the
deal might feel like crossing the finish
line but in reality it's like just the
starting point of some of the really
hard work so to many uh Founders who
celebrate too early they think their
work is done once you've done that
signature but the hardest part isn't
about getting acquired it's what comes
next the integration and as a Corp de
leader I um am very involved in the
integration process and we tell you that
m&a grade ards are filled with deals
that looked great on the hunting license
presentation or the press release
announcing it but then totally crumbled
in execution culture clashes leadership
misalignment integration missteps can
turn multi hundred million doll Billion
Dollar Deals into the cautionary tale so
if you want your company to thrive post
acquisition you can't check out after
the announcement now even though I say
that integration was this moment at the
that you really get serious about at the
da integration should have really
started long ago during due diligence
and I think it's one of the biggest
mistakes that gets made in m& is you
treat due diligence is just this kind of
legal and financial exercise really it's
the first steps of integration planning
where as you understand the business
what you're really thinking about is how
are these functions going to will work
together once the deal closes when done
right early integration planning
minimizes disruptions it will retain the
key talent and really accelerate the
value of the
deal and then the last thing I'll say
during this phase as kind of Pounders
and leaders is the importance of
protecting your people m&a isn't just
about code and revenue numbers it's
about the people prioritizing your
employees during the transition they're
what made your company value
in the first place and the honest thing
is that employees you know might not
assume when they read the pro Le that
it's a great thing that they've been
acquired they're going to start to
wonder what does it mean for me and fear
uncertainty and lack of clarity and to
be honest even though I thought that and
understood it on one side of the deal
having done 20 plus years of being a
buyer I really realized that being on
the inside and own very different when I
was one of people saying what does this
mean for me and what's changes the same
and what does this mean to my career for
a lot of deals I've done recently I've
done special carve outs for the
employees that were not astronomical
right but were material and the Target
in essence paid for them right exactly
if you're nice about it you're not going
to get a lot of argument acceptance for
jerks but you could make your team so
much more money if you do it it's one
example but there are ways to do things
that won't create huge drama but man
when the LOI is signed it's gets rigid
doesn't it oh yeah it is it is truly
locked I think even the best acquirers
don't always know who the special people
on your team are for sure we don't
absolutely we might know some of the
headlines and we have to do that trust
of working with you to dig under the
covers and understand from you and I'll
usually position it like hey you're like
you're digging your own grave here to
some extent so help me help me help you
you tell me who your real difference
makers are who your hexers are so that
we can be really smart about deploying
the dollars that will help you be really
successful optimize a chance for Success
especially in that like Runway period of
where we get you to self-sufficiency and
take off on your own yeah I find most
acquirers will definitely try to figure
out who the top five to seven Engineers
are that's on every checklist okay who's
the most important folks on the dev team
but the other folks that are the glue of
your company you have to see their
Champions and you got to do before the L
sign so now bonus um in my Dave Kellogg
who I know taught me early in my career
about the important rule of three so I
struggled with a list of 10 how to fit
Dave Kellogg's rule of three so then I
had a bonus after the close the most
important thing to realize is all right
it gets real the honeymoon is over so
for all the optimism that exists when
the acquisition processes started and
gotten to those major Milestones when
you are deep in integration once the
press release is long and after
afterthought and the executive quotes
that were full of excitement have
drifted off reality sets in and that's
when as a part of the
organization every everything gets very
real again about the competing
priorities the operational challenges
the culture clashes that will start to
emerge the truth is postacquisition
integration is really hard really
unglamorous cultures don't merge
overnight a lot of the people will
resist the change you'll find where
business units have very different and
misaligned incentives so the key of
surviving this phase is finding ways to
get to alignment and having massive
adaptability to ensure that both sides
are committed to working through the
friction instead of fighting against it
thanks again for the time man this was
great awesome stuff thank you everyone
talk you soon